arXiv:2505.20993v1  [cs.CL]  27 May 2025Who Reasons in the Large Language Models?
Jie Shao Jianxin Wu∗
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
shaoj@lamda.nju.edu.cn, wujx2001@nju.edu.cn
Abstract
Despite the impressive performance of large language models (LLMs), the pro-
cess of endowing them with new capabilities—such as mathematical reasoning—
remains largely empirical and opaque. A critical open question is whether reasoning
abilities stem from the entire model, specific modules, or are merely artifacts of
overfitting. In this work, we hypothesize that the reasoning capabilities in well-
trained LLMs are primarily attributed to the output projection module ( o_proj )
in the Transformer’s multi-head self-attention (MHSA) module. To support this
hypothesis, we introduce Stethoscope for Networks (SfN), a suite of diagnostic
tools designed to probe and analyze the internal behaviors of LLMs. Using SfN,
we provide both circumstantial and empirical evidence suggesting that o_proj
plays a central role in enabling reasoning, whereas other modules contribute more
to fluent dialogue. These findings offer a new perspective on LLM interpretability
and open avenues for more targeted training strategies, potentially enabling more
efficient and specialized LLMs.
1 Introduction
Although large language models (LLMs) [ 29,6,41,5] have exhibited great success and potential
in various aspects, developing new capabilities for LLMs [ 53,17,37,14] is still a trial and error
experimentation process in most cases. For example, one of the most exciting milestones is LLMs
that can reason [ 18,13,39], e.g., solving complicated mathematical problems using a reasoning
sequence that is agreeable by human experts.
This success, however, is still in the black-box style. Currently, there are two primary approaches
to inspiring reasoning capabilities in LLMs. For the most advanced models [ 13,51], reinforcement
learning method (for example, PPO [ 36], DPO [ 30], or GRPO [ 37]) is commonly adopted to enhance
the model’s ability to solve complex mathematical or programming problems in a step-by-step
manner [ 48]. A more efficient alternative involves supervised fine-tuning (SFT): by providing the
backbone LLM with well-prepared, diverse, and step-by-step reasoning traces—often generated
through handcrafted examples or existing reasoning models [ 54,25,13,51]—the model surprisingly
acquires reasoning abilities after training. However, despite the practical success of this method,
the underlying mechanism remains largely unexplained. It is still unclear why or how this ability
emerges. Several potential explanations may account for this phenomenon:
Case 1 Is it the LLM in its entirety (i.e., the union of all its weights) that leads to this capability,
such that this miracle is not explainable?
Case 2 Or, is there certain module(s) in it that should be praised for this success, such that we can
advance our understanding of LLMs?
∗Corresponding author.
Preprint. Under review.Chat: {q, k, v}_proj & MLP Reason: o_projStethoscope for Networks 
🩺 1. The Delta Stethoscope2. The Merge Stethoscope3. The Freeze Stethoscope
Base Model
Reasoning Model
💯minus
❓
❓
Base Model
🧊
🔥SFT
Reasoning Model
Reasoning Model
💯
Base Model
Merged  Model
merge4. The Destruction Stethoscope
chat
chat
LLMChatReasonConjecture: Figure 1: Stethoscope for Networks. SfN is a framework designed to identify which components of
an LLM give rise to specific abilities. By comparing weight changes and observing behaviors under
controlled module merging, tuning, or destruction, SfN provides interpretable insights into the origin
of capabilities like reasoning.
Case 3 Or in the worst scenario, is reasoning an illusion (e.g., by overfitting to certain types of data),
such that we have overestimated the potentials of LLMs?
A definitive answer to any of the above questions will be extremely valuable to guiding the future
direction of LLM research. Even a hypothesis or conjecture supported by circumstantial evidences
will be highly enlightening, too, let alone when convincing empirical evidences are available.
To this end, our hypothesis is that Case 2 holds in LLMs that reason well. To be more precise,
we hypothesize that it is the output projection’s parameters ( o_proj ) in the Transformer [ 43]’s
multi-head self-attention (MHSA) module that is in charge of reasoning in an LLM.
To support our hypothesis, we propose a few techniques for diagnosing LLM’s behaviors, in particular,
the potential functionalities and impacts of various modules in it. We call these techniques Stethoscope
for Networks, or SfN (summarized and illustrated in Figure 1). Starting from reasoning-enhanced
models, we argue that the weight differences between a base LLM and its fine-tuned counterpart (e.g.,
for reasoning tasks) provide firsthand and crucial evidence for understanding internal changes. We
refer to this approach as the Delta Stethoscope.
In addition, we introduce two novel and previously unexplored methods within the SfN framework:
the Merge Stethoscope and the Destruction Stethoscope. The Merge Stethoscope replaces specific
modules in a base model with those from a reasoning model. Surprisingly, the resulting variant
can maintain fluent dialogue and demonstrate improved reasoning ability in some cases. This
phenomenon offers strong clues about the origin and localization of reasoning capability in LLMs.
The Destruction Stethoscope, in contrast, systematically disables individual modules and observes
the resulting behavior to infer the functional roles of each component. We also propose the Freeze
Stethoscope, which selectively freezes parts of the model during fine-tuning. By controlling which
modules are updated, we provide convincing empirical support for earlier insights and clues into the
localization of reasoning within LLMs.
With different gadgets we propose in SfN, we provide not only sanity check level tests for our
hypothesis, but also more convincing circumstantial supports and even direct empirical evidences. In
short, the contributions in this paper are two-fold:
•With various diagnosis evidence (SfN), we are confident in hypothesizing that the output
projection o_proj is mainly responsible for the reasoning in LLMs. The impact of this
finding include not only potential ways to improve LLM that reasons (e.g., training much
faster), but may generalize to produce better LLMs for other tasks (e.g., for a vertical LLM
designed specifically for a domain). Our further conjecture is that other modules combined
together lead to lucid conversations, but o_proj is less important in conversational ability.
•The proposed Stethoscope for Networks (SfN) gadgets are a set of tools that are useful in
understanding modern LLMs and even other networks, which have the potential to enhance
our understanding of LLM or deep neural network and may lead to alternative routes for
further deep learning research.
22 Key Hypothesis: Output Projection is the Key for Reasoning
To present our findings, we start by introducing necessary background information and notations,
while discussions on related work are deferred to Section 5.
Modern LLMs [ 41,5,29] mostly consist of many Transformer blocks. A Transformer [ 43] block
is composed of a multi-head self-attention (MHSA) module and a multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
module. Components in MHSA include various projections, such as those for computing Q, K
and V , denoted as q_proj ,k_proj , and v_proj , respectively. The output projection ( o_proj )
produces MHSA’s output. Components in the MLP are mainly linear projections: up, down, and
gate [ 16,41,5] projections, denoted as up_proj ,down_proj , and gate_proj , respectively. The
computation process is defined as:
xattn=wo
Softmax(wqx)(wkx)⊤
√
d
(wvx)
xmlp=wdown
σ(wgatex)⊙(wupx)(1)
For simplicity, we omit residual connections and present the computation at the token level, without
using matrix or vectorized notation. Other essential components not explicitly included in equa-
tion 1 include rotary positional embeddings (RoPE)[ 38], input embeddings ( embed_tokens ), layer
normalization[4] ( layernorm ), and the language modeling head ( lm_head ).
LetAbe an LLM with weak or no reasoning ability. By carefully procuring a dataset of reasoning
examples [ 13,25,51], one can cleanse and improve the quality of the dataset into the training data D,
and then finetune the existing model Aby using techniques such as SFT. The resulting LLM, model
B, exhibits strong reasoning capabilities. For example, in commonly adopted practices, the base LLM
Ais typically a widely used open-source model such as Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B, 7B or Qwen2.5-14B,
32B [ 52]. The reasoning model Bdenotes a publicly available reasoning-enhanced variant, such
as DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B, 7B, 14B, 32B [ 13], which comes with a clearly specified base
model and well-documented training procedure. Models that are either not open-sourced [ 13,39],
or open-sourced without sufficient training details [ 40] or access to the base model [ 51], are not
discussed in this paper.
2.1 The Delta Stethoscope
In the above scenario, it is obvious that AandBshare exactly the same network architecture
and structure, with their sole difference being the weights (parameters) inside various components.
Suppose w(A)(w(B)) denotes the set of weights for all modules in A(B). Then, it is natural to
conclude that to understand the difference between AandB(i.e., reasoning or not), we should focus
on the difference between w(A)andw(B). Hence, we propose our first Stethoscope for Network.
Assumption 1 (The Delta Stethoscope) Suppose AandBare two LLMs with weak and strong
reasoning ability, respectively, and Bis obtained by finetuning from A. Then w(B)−w(A)contains
essential information if we want to pinpoint the source of the reasoning ability in B.
For each component X(e.g. X=q_proj ), we compute the ℓ2norm of the weight difference,
∥wX(B)−wX(A)∥ℓ2, and visualize the results across all the blocks in Figure 2. For simplicity and
due to space constraints, we present three representative comparisons: Ais Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B [ 53]
or Qwen2.5-14B, 32B [ 52] and Bis DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B, 14B, 32B [ 13]. Additional
results for other model sizes (7B and 8B) are provided in the appendix and exhibit similar patterns.
For the 1.5B models, the signal is less clear, but o_proj still exhibits a distinct pattern compared to
q,k,v_proj —showing the largest change within the attention module and the second-largest across
the entire model. As model size increases to 14B and 32B, this trend becomes more pronounced. In
both cases, the most notable observation is that when X=o_proj , theℓ2norm is at least two times
larger than any other component, indicating the substantial changes in this module during reasoning
enhancement.
In Figure 3, we further analyze the distribution of relative weight changeswX(B)−wX(A)
wX(A)for each
linear module. To improve clarity and visual appeal, we plot the distribution every 5 layers and clip
values in the range [−1.0,1.0]to mitigate the influence of outliers. The vertical axis represents the
3Qwen2.5-14B vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14BQwen2.5-32B vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32BQwen2.5-Math-1.5B vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B
q_proj k_proj v_proj o_proj up_proj gate_proj down_proj
q_proj k_proj v_proj o_proj up_proj gate_proj down_proj
q_proj k_proj v_proj o_proj up_proj gate_proj down_proj(Layer)Figure 2: Per-module L2 distance of linear weights between models AandB.Notably, the
o_proj module shows the second-largest change in 1.5B models, and the largest in 14B and 32B
models, highlighting its potential importance for reasoning. Similar trends are observed in 7B and 8B
models (see appendix).
Qwen2.5-32B vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-32BQwen2.5-14B vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B
MLP.down_proj MLP.gate_proj MLP.up_proj self_attn.k_proj self_attn.o_proj self_attn.q_proj self_attn.v_projQwen-2.5-Math-1.5B vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B
Figure 3: Layer-wise distribution of relative weight changes between models AandB.While
most modules display a unimodal distribution, the o_proj module uniquely exhibits a bimodal
distribution, highlighting its distinctive behavior. Consistent patterns are observed across models of
other sizes, with detailed results provided in the appendix.
frequency. A striking and consistent finding is that all linear modules—except o_proj —exhibit
a unimodal distribution centered around zero, whereas o_proj uniquely displays a clear bimodal
pattern , highlighting its distinct role.
Both observations hold consistently across model sizes and base models: o_proj exhibits the largest
or second-largest weight shift, and the overall weight difference patterns remain strikingly similar.
Therefore, it is reasonable to guess that the output projection o_proj plays a pivotal role in curating
B’s reasoning ability. We are, however, not aware of o_proj ’s specific role: is it solely responsible
for reasoning? Or, is it collaborating with another module(s)? Or, in the worst scenario, is this
difference in ∥wX(B)−wX(A)∥ℓ2andwX(B)−wX(A)
wX(A)coincidental?
4Level I: NonsenseOutput lacks coherence or meaning.Q: Can you write a short paragraph about the importance of reading books?
A1: [[[[[[ … / A2: the importance of course, the importance of course, of course, the importance of course, of course …Level II: IrrelevantGrammatically correct, but contextually oﬀ-topic.Q: Can you write a short paragraph about the importance of reading books?
A: Can you provide me with some data?Level III: Context-AwareUnderstands the question, but may apply ﬂawed reasoning.Q: Every morning, Aya  … This morning, if she walks at s+1/2 kilometers per hour, how many minutes will the walk take?
A: First, let's set up the equations … Simplify and solve:
    ;  …
     Final answer: 12144s−st−2t=2524s−st60=9Level IV: Correct and Logical ReasoningFully understands the context and provides a valid solution.Q: Every morning, Aya … This morning, if she walks at s+1/2 kilometers per hour, how many minutes will the walk take?
A: First, the problem says that …
Subtract:

Then: 
 Today: speed is 3 km/h,  walk = 180 min, total = 180 + 24 = 204 minutes.
9(1s−1s+2)=1.6→s(s+2)=11.25→s=2.53.6+t60=4→t=24
❌
⚠
🤔
✅Q: Can you write a short paragraph about the importance of reading books?
A: Absolutely! Reading is a crucial skill that can help students improve … and understand the implications of these skills. Figure 4: Four levels of responses generated by the LLM . From level I to level IV , the model
exhibits stronger language organization and logical reasoning skills. Each example includes a question
(e.g., a math problem from AIME or a typical user-issued request) and the corresponding response
generated by the LLM.
2.2 The Merge Stethoscope
We design another gadget, the Merge Stethoscope, to answer this question. Suppose an LLM Mis
formed by merging models AandB, that is, Mhas the same structure as AandB, while a subset
of its modules’ parameters come from Aand the rest from B. In a conversational or reasoning task,
what will the output of Mlook like? We can imagine 4 levels of different output, as
Level I A sequence of random or nonsense tokens.
Level II A sequence that looks like normal sentences, but does not fit into the context of the task.
Level III A sequence that is meaningful sentences that match the task’s context well but will fail to
reason in difficult problems.
Level IV A sequence that reasons—and reasons correctly in most cases.
Figure 4 shows examples of level I to IV outputs. It is worth highlighting that Misrudely merged
fromAandBwithout any further tuning . Hence, the intuitive conjecture will be that Mwill produce
level I output (i.e., ushering meaningless tokens). However, if model M, when merged in a specific
configuration, is capable of producing level IV outputs for questions that model Afails to solve, then
the specially merged components are likely critical for reasoning.
Assumption 2 (The Merge Stethoscope) Suppose Mis created by merging the output projection
(o_proj ) weights of B(which has strong reasoning ability) and all other components of A(which is
weak in reasoning), and further suppose that Mhas stronger reasoning ability compared to A. Then,
we assume o_proj is crucial in achieving reasoning in LLMs.
We attempt a minimal or atomic merge by replacing only the o_proj modules in model A=
Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B [53] with that of model B=DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B [13], keeping
all other components unchanged. Although we initially expected the resulting model to produce level
I or level II outputs, the results turn out to be surprising. On the AIME 2024 benchmark [ 19], the
merged model M1achieves level IV performance on several questions that model Acannot solve. As
shown in Table 1, the merged model not only yields correct reasoning and answers, but also tends to
generate longer and more detailed responses compared to A. In contrast, replacing other modules
such as {q,k,v}_proj andmlpleads to performance degradation. For example, model M2, which
replaces {q,k,v}_proj , produces level III outputs, while M3, which replaces mlp, deteriorates
to level I. Only replacing o_proj results in a correct reasoning process and a correct answer, as
illustrated in Figure 5. This striking difference motivates our further investigation in Section 3.
5ModelReplaced
ModuleAIME
2024Average
Tokens
A(Q-1.5B) - 0.067 2421
M1 o_proj 0.200 5418
M2 {q,k,v}_proj 0.000 2058
M3 mlp 0.000 15532
B(D-1.5B) - 0.233 11892
Table 1: AIME 2024 accuracy of the base
model, the reasoning model, and their merged
variants. Each merged model is constructed by
replacing specific modules in model Awith the
corresponding module from model B.
Q: Every morning, Aya does a 9 kilometer walk … if she walks at s+1/2 kilometers per hour, how many minutes will the walk take?: To solve this problem, we need to determine … So, the walk will take 204 minutes, including the 24 minutes at the coﬀee shop. The ﬁnal answer is 204.M1: To solve this problem … output 12.0000000000000. The output indicates that the time taken for the walk is 12 minutes. So, the ﬁnal answer is 12.M2: … walking speeds increase speeds faster walking speeds increase walking speeds faster walking speeds faster walking …M3Figure 5: Examples of outputs generated by
merged models. OnlyM1produces both a valid
reasoning process and the correct answer.
These results clearly show that the merged model Mhas a stronger reasoning capacity than A, despite
thatMis sutured from two completely different models and has never being finetuned. Now we feel
confident in our assumption that o_proj is the key component responsible for reasoning in LLMs.
2.3 The Freeze Stethoscope
As models AandBscale up (e.g., to 7B parameters), merging components such as q,k,v_proj or
mlpstill results in significant performance degradation. However, unfortunately, merging o_proj no
longer brings notable improvements in solving complex mathematical problems—although it does
not harm accuracy, and still increases the generated output length.
Our analysis of ||wX(B)−wX(A)||ℓ2suggests that this is due to a substantial mismatch in normal-
ization parameters (that is, layernorm modules) between AandBat larger scales, compared to
smaller models (e.g. 1.5B). Even when we merge both o_proj andlayernorm parameters from B,
the resulting model Mstill fails to reason effectively, probably because the remaining parameters of
Aare incompatible with the normalization parameters of B. To investigate this hypothesis in larger
LLMs, we introduce the Freeze Stethoscope.
Assumption 3 (The Freeze Stethoscope) Suppose that an LLM Fis obtained by supervised fine-
tuning using the dataset D.Fis initialized from A, and both o_proj and normalization components
are tuned while other components are frozen. If Fexhibits strong reasoning ability, then we assume
thato_proj is crucial in achieving reasoning in LLMs even in large-scale models.
It is worth noting that embed_tokens andlm_head are also tuned.2Normalization module pa-
rameters are unfrozen by default. We adopt the pipeline of s1 [ 25] as our baseline, which uses the
base model A=Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct and the dataset D=s1K containing 1,000 high-quality
reasoning traces. The results are shown in Table 2, where our model F4corresponds to model Bin
Assumption 3. We do notstrictly follow the training or testing setup of s1, primarily due to limited
computational resources and the lack of an exact testing recipe to reproduce the reported results.
However, our objective is not to optimize accuracy via testing tricks or prompt tuning, but to highlight
the effectiveness of o_proj tuning compared to full-parameter tuning. For fair comparison, we adopt
the “Budget Forcing Wait 2x” setting from s1 and retain all configurations without hyperparameter
tuning.
Using this simplest possible experimental setup, Table 2 clearly shows that simply tuning o_proj
andlayernorm (model F2)) leads to strong reasoning ability, while at the same time only tuning
layernorm (model F1) harms the reasoning of the LLM. Further unfreezing the parameters of
{q,k,v}_proj (model F3) yields little additional gain or even negative impact.
The training loss curves are shown in Figure 6. When all parameters including MLP are unfrozen,
the model exhibits clear signs of overfitting, likely using the large MLP capacity to memorize the
training set. In contrast, tuning only o_proj yields a smoother and more stable curve. Combined
2Without tuning these components, finetuning failed to converge.
60.10.20.30.4
050100150200250300Loss
Steps0.10.20.30.4
050100150200250300Loss
Steps32B14BF1F2F3F4Figure 6: Training loss curves for fine-tuning Qwen2.5-14B,32B-Instruct on reasoning tasks.
Different models unfreeze different sets of parameters, as detailed in Table 2.
Model Fintuned Modules #Param (B) Steps/s AIME 2024 Math 500 GPQA Diamond
A(Q-32B) - - - 0.167 0.836 0.485
F1 Emb + Head 1.5 0.055 0.200 0.756 0.444
F2 Emb + Head + o_proj 3.2 0.052 0.367 0.890 0.520
F3 Emb + Head + {q,k,v,o}_proj 5.6 0.044 0.300 0.886 0.525
F4(B) All 32.8 0.015 0.367 0.906 0.591
A(Q-14B) - - - 0.133 0.810 0.449
F1 Emb + Head 1.5 0.106 0.133 0.722 0.414
F2 Emb + Head + o_proj 2.8 0.099 0.266 0.848 0.485
F3 Emb + Head + {q,k,v,o}_proj 3.7 0.081 0.233 0.854 0.490
F4(B) All 14.7 0.053 0.266 0.872 0.530
Table 2: Reasoning performance of different fine-tuning strategies on Qwen2.5-{14B, 32B}-
Instruct. Emb denotes embed_tokens , Head denotes lm_head , and Attn denotes the entire MHSA.
#Param refers to the number of trainable parameters, Steps/s indicates training speed, and the last
three columns report commonly used metrics for evaluating reasoning models.
with its competitive performance, this suggests that the model learns to reason rather than simply
memorize. Hence, we are now prepared and feel supported to propose our key hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1 (Outstanding Output Projection) In an LLM that reasons well, we hypothesize that
the output projection ( o_proj ) component is the single or at least the most important module that
dominates its reasoning ability.
With carefully chosen tuning strategy and hyperparameters, there is reason to believe that tuning
only o_proj (+LN) can reach the level of model Bin terms of reasoning performance. And,
beyond exhibiting reasoning abilities, Table 2 also shows that tuning only o_proj (+LN) has other
significant advantages: e.g., significantly faster finetuning (3 times faster) and smaller GPU memory
consumption. These advantages will become more established when larger LLMs are tuned.
3 Conjecture: Conversation Hinges on Other Modules but Not Output
We are mainly concerned with two abilities of LLMs: conversation and reasoning, which map to level
III and IV in our categorization of LLM’s outputs, respectively. Our Hypothesis 1 is on reasoning,
but are there one module or several modules accounting for lucid conversations? In this section, we
further propose a new stethoscope to diagnose this question and raise our conjectures accordingly.
3.1 The Destruction Stethoscope
Our previous stethoscopes follow a “constructive proof” style, while now we resort to the “proof by
contradiction” style. If one module in an LLM is “destructed”, and the LLM can still produce level
III conversation outputs, then we have good reasons to guess that this module is not important in
conversational ability; while it is important if the LLM ceases to dialogue regularly.
Assumption 4 (The Destruction Stethoscope) Suppose a module Xis destructed (i.e., its normal
functionality is disabled by some destruction method) in an LLM A. We denote the resulting LLM as
7Destruction
MethodModuleOutput
LevelDestruction
MethodModuleOutput
Level
Zeroq_proj I
ReInitq_proj I
k_proj I k_proj I
v_proj III v_proj II
o_proj III o_proj III
up_proj I up_proj I
gate_proj I gate_proj I
down_proj I down_proj I
Remove - I
Table 3: Output levels of different modules under the three destruction methods: Zero ,ReInit ,
andRemove .All experiments are based on Qwen2.5-32B with destruction applied to specific layers.
D. Then, the fact that Dcontinues (or ceases to) produce level III output (meaningful sentences in
the conversation’s context) indicates whether Xis important for conversational abilities or not.
We propose 3 destructors to destroy a module:
Zero Set all parameters within Xto 0.
ReInit Re-initialize all parameters inside Xusing Gaussian random numbers (mean=0, std=0.02).
Remove Remove the entire layer.
TheZero destructor is often equivalent to setting the output activation of Xto zeros (e.g., in a linear
module like o_proj ). We want to emphasize that ReInit incurs more serious damages to an LLM
thanZero does. Zero may change activations to zero, but ReInit exerts random effects (i.e., noise)
to LLM activations. What is more important, these random effects will act as input to the next
Transformer block and the noise is quickly amplified. Hence, level I or II output is expected when X
is destroyed (especially when reinitialized) in a large number of Transformer blocks.
3.2 Conjectures Concerning the Conversation Capability
For model Qwen2.5-32B with 64 layers, we observe that destroying modules in early or late layers—
where input and output representations are more sensitive—consistently yields level I outputs. To
avoid this, we restrict destruction to blocks 5–30. This range is empirically chosen, as affecting more
layers often causes all outputs to degrade to level I, making distinctions between modules impossible.
The experimental results are presented in Table 3. Specifically, we destroy selected modules and
analyze the corresponding output. The Remove destructor removes the transformer layers as a whole.
Note that the results are not statistics computed in many different experiments—it only reflects the
conversation illustrated in Figure 4, but we observed similar patterns for other conversations.
Table 3 reveals distinct roles of modules in conversation. Notably, o_proj —crucial for reasoning—
appears unimportant for conversation. In contrast, all MLP components ( up_proj ,down_proj ,
gate_proj ) are essential. Within MHSA, q_proj andk_proj are important, while v_proj plays a
minor role. Based on these (admittedly weaker) observations, we propose the following conjecture.
Conjecture 1 (Division of Labor) Based on current observations, an LLM can be roughly divided
as two sets of modules: output projection ( o_proj ) and all others, where o_proj is mainly responsi-
ble for reasoning and other modules for conversation.
Then, output projection plays a unique role if this conjecture holds. Hence, we further propose
another conjecture for it.
Conjecture 2 (Output Projection Plugin) With conversational capabilities provided by other
(frozen) modules, output projections may act as a plugin. For example, one set of o_proj for
reasoning, and another set of o_proj for migrating an LLM to a vertical domain.
84 Potential Implications and Applications
This paper mainly diagnoses LLMs from a theoretical, highly abstract perspective. However, our
hypothesis and conjectures can also have highly practical implications and applications as long as
they are correct or at least partially hold.
•Fast and better reasoning LLMs . By finetuning only o_proj , we can potentially find a
better reasoning LLM with much faster training and much smaller GPU memory footprint.
•Integrating non-reasoning and reasoning LLMs. There is a recent trend to integrate
chatting and reasoning LLMs into one model [ 51]. When we finetune a base LLM into
a reasoning one using the previous procedure, they only differ in o_proj ,layernorm ,
embed_tokens andlmhead , which occupy only 10% of model size. Hence, the two LLMs
are easily loaded as one LLM with two sets of these module for different purposes.
•Vertical LLMs . Similarly, when equipped with different output projection plugins, one may
adeptly obtain vertical LLMs for different domains.
•Understanding deep neural networks. The proposed Stethoscopes for Networks might
be useful gadgets to understand other deep models, and new stethoscopes can be further
developed. They will be potentially useful in diagnosing existing networks and even in
providing alternative directions to future deep learning research.
5 Related Work
Large Language Models. Modern LLMs such as GPT [ 29,6], LLaMA [ 41,42], Qwen [ 5,52],
and other representative models [ 7,20] adopt an auto-regressive architecture and have demonstrated
impressive capabilities across a wide range of natural language processing tasks, including question
answering [ 32,22], summarization [ 26,27], and translation [ 50]. These models are typically trained
on large-scale corpora using next-token prediction objectives, and their performance has been
shown to scale with model size [ 21]. Further improvements in alignment and usability have been
achieved through instruction tuning [ 28,9,46] and reinforcement learning from human feedback
(RLHF) [8, 30], enabling more controllable and helpful dialogue generation.
Reasoning Models. While LLMs exhibit emergent reasoning abilities [ 47], recent efforts have
further enhanced these capabilities through fine-tuning and architectural modifications [ 35,55].
Chain-of-thought prompting [ 48] encourages intermediate reasoning steps, improving performance
in arithmetic tasks, while self-consistency decoding [ 45] improves robustness by sampling multiple
reasoning paths. Inspired by OpenAI’s o1[18], most advanced models now employ reinforcement
learning [ 36,30] to generate long reasoning traces with sparse rewards. This leads to significant
improvements, particularly in complex math, code, and other professional domains [ 13,51]. Despite
these advances, the origin and location of reasoning ability in LLMs remain underexplored.
Interpretability of LLMs. Understanding the inner workings of LLMs has attracted growing
interest. Prior efforts include attention visualization [ 44], probing [ 15], and model editing [ 24,34],
with the aim of interpreting internal representations. Other studies decompose the behavior of
the model into attribute functions to specific modules [ 11]. The "Physics of Language Models"
series [ 1,2,3] investigates LLMs through controlled setups to reveal empirical and universal laws
that dictate LLM behavior. However, these studies often exclude the most advanced models or focus
on narrow, synthetic settings, offering limited insight into real-world models. Their findings provide
little practical guidance for understanding reasoning in state-of-the-art models.
6 Conclusions
This work investigates a fundamental question in understanding large language models (LLMs): Is
there a component or several components that are responsible for achieving the reasoning ability in
LLMs? If the answer is affirmative, which components are responsible for the improvement?
We hypothesize that the output projection ( o_proj ) module plays a central role in enabling reasoning
capabilities. To support this, we propose Stethoscope for Networks (SfN) , a diagnostic framework
9that encompasses several probing techniques. Through the proposed Delta ,Merge ,Freeze , and
Destruction stethoscopes, we observe consistent patterns indicating that o_proj is critical for
reasoning, while other modules primarily support conversational fluency. These findings open new
directions for efficient and modular LLM training.
Our findings are primarily based on a limited set of model families and reasoning benchmarks,
and may not generalize to all architectures or tasks. Some diagnostic results rely on qualitative
assessments rather than statistical validation. Furthermore, while the role of o_proj is empirically
highlighted, a theoretical understanding of its function in reasoning remains to be established.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work was partly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant
62276123
JW proposed the assumptions (Stethoscopes for Networks), hypothesis and conjectures. JS started
this line of research in our group, proposed the Zero destructor, and effectively supported our main
findings with experimental results. JW and JS wrote the paper.
We thank Ke Zhu for discussions.
A Experimental Details
We primarily utilize open-sourced models to conduct experiments in this work. Given that DeepSeek-
R1 is one of the most widely adopted reasoning models, and its authors have released a series of
distilled models based on R1 [ 13], including both the specified base and finetuned reasoning models,
we adopt their configurations in our study. Specifically, we use the DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen [ 13]
models with sizes of 1.5B, 7B, 14B, 32B and 70B as our reasoning models, and select Qwen2.5-
Math-1.5B, 7B [ 53], LLaMA3.1-8B [ 12], Qwen2.5-14B, 32B [ 52] or Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct [ 12] as
base models. All models are loaded and run using the Transformers library [49].
Our evaluation framework is based on the lm-evaluation-harness package [ 10]. To accelerate inference,
we use vLLM [ 23] as the backend, which may slightly affect performance due to backend-specific
optimizations. In the Merge Stethoscope experiments, we observe that the “chat” interface often
generates irrelevant or nonsensical responses, while the “generate” interface produces coherent and
contextually appropriate outputs. We suspect this discrepancy arises from misinterpreted system
prompts. Therefore, we rely on the “generate” interface and implement a custom evaluation toolkit.
For the Freeze Stethoscope experiments, we build on the codebase of s1[ 25]. We use a learning
rate of 1e-5, weight decay of 1e-4, a batch size of 16, and train for 5 epochs. Due to hardware
limitations (i.e., lack of access to 16 H100 GPUs), we leverage DeepSpeed[ 33] with ZeRO Stage
3[31] to enable efficient training. The base model used here is Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct[ 52]. Evaluation
is again conducted with lm-evaluation-harness, following the modified pipeline by the authors of s1,
which disables generation of the end-of-thinking token and optionally appends the string “Wait” to
the reasoning trace to encourage model reflection. We adopt the Budget Forcing “Wait” ×2 as our
default testing configuration.
All visualization and inference experiments on 1.5B–14B models are conducted on a single NVIDIA
A100 GPU. For training and evaluating 32B-70B models, we use a cluster of 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs.
Training typically takes around 6 hours, while testing on a single dataset usually requires about 2
hours.
B More Experimental Results
In the main paper, we present visualization results for the 1.5B, 14B, and 32B models. Here, we
supplement those results by providing additional visualizations for the 7B, 8B, and 70B models.
Following the Delta Stethoscope pipeline, we visualize both the absolute weight shift |wX(B)−
wX(A)|ℓ2and the relative weight shiftwX(B)−wX(A)
wX(A). The absolute weight shifts are shown in
Figure 7, and the relative weight shifts are presented in Figure 8. The trends observed in the main
paper remain consistent across these additional models. Notably, o_proj consistently exhibits the
10Qwen2.5Math–7B vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7BLlama-3.1-8B vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8BLlama3.3-70B-Instruct vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-70BFigure 7: Per-module L2 distance of linear weights between models AandB.Notably, the
o_proj module shows the largest in 7B, 8B and 70B models, highlighting its potential importance
for reasoning.
Llama3.3-70B-Instruct vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-70BLlama-3.1-8B vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B
MLP.down_projMLP.gate_projMLP.up_projself_attn.k_projself_attn.o_projself_attn.q_projself_attn.v_projQwen2.5Math–7B vs. DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B
Figure 8: Layer-wise distribution of relative weight changes between models AandB.While
most modules display a unimodal distribution, the o_proj module uniquely exhibits a bimodal
distribution, highlighting its distinctive behavior.
largest weight shift, with the effect being especially pronounced in the 70B model. Moreover, o_proj
is the only module that displays a bimodal distribution in the relative weight shift.
C Statistical Significance and Broader Impacts
We report appropriate information regarding the statistical significance of our experiments. While we
do not primarily focus on classical significance tests such as p-values, we provide multiple forms of
empirical evidence—such as consistent module-specific weight shifts, response-level comparisons
under controlled manipulations, and loss curves under different tuning strategies—that collectively
establish the robustness of our findings. These analyses serve as a practical alternative to traditional
error bars or confidence intervals and help substantiate our key claims.
This research has both promising benefits and important risks to consider. On the positive side, the
proposed Stethoscope for Networks (SfN) framework provides a novel set of tools for interpreting
11LLMs, especially by localizing specific capabilities—such as reasoning—to individual components
like the output projection (o_proj). These tools may significantly improve our understanding of LLMs,
enabling more transparent, modular, and efficient model development. For instance, if reasoning
abilities can be enhanced by tuning a small subset of parameters, it could greatly reduce computational
costs and increase accessibility for developing domain-specific or lightweight models.
However, this line of work also carries potential risks. Precisely identifying and isolating reasoning-
related components might lower the barrier for targeted manipulation, such as unauthorized transfer
or removal of reasoning abilities across models. This could facilitate misuse scenarios, including
capability extraction, tampering, or model theft. Furthermore, while the diagnostic methods proposed
aim to support interpretability, there is a risk that they may be overinterpreted, leading to an inflated
sense of model transparency that does not generalize across architectures or tasks.
References
[1]Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.1, knowledge storage
and extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14316 , 2023.
[2]Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.2, knowledge manipula-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.14402 , 2023.
[3] Zeyuan Allen-Zhu and Yuanzhi Li. Physics of language models: Part 3.3, knowledge capacity
scaling laws. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05405 , 2024.
[4]Jimmy Lei Ba, Jamie Ryan Kiros, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Layer normalization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1607.06450 , 2016.
[5]Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge,
Yu Han, Fei Huang, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609 , 2023.
[6]Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[7]Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Nina
Mielke, Alec Radford, et al. Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02311 , 2022.
[8]Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, Tom B Brown, Miljan Martic, Shane Legg, and Dario Amodei.
Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. In Advances in neural information
processing systems , volume 30, 2017.
[9]Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Xin Wang,
Xingyu Yuan, Adams Yu, Sharan Narang, et al. Scaling instruction-finetuned language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416 , 2022.
[10] Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Baber Abbasi, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles
Foster, Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Alain Le Noac’h, Haonan Li, Kyle McDonell, Niklas
Muennighoff, Chris Ociepa, Jason Phang, Laria Reynolds, Hailey Schoelkopf, Aviya Skowron,
Lintang Sutawika, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. The
language model evaluation harness, 07 2024.
[11] Mor Geva, Tal Schuster, and Jonathan Berant. Transformer feed-forward layers are key-value
memories. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.14913 , 2021.
[12] Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian,
Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama
3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 , 2024.
[13] Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Ruoyu Zhang, Runxin Xu, Qihao Zhu,
Shirong Ma, Peiyi Wang, Xiao Bi, et al. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capability in
llms via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 , 2025.
12[14] Daya Guo, Qihao Zhu, Dejian Yang, Zhenda Xie, Kai Dong, Wentao Zhang, Guanting Chen,
Xiao Bi, Yu Wu, YK Li, et al. Deepseek-coder: When the large language model meets
programming–the rise of code intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14196 , 2024.
[15] John Hewitt and Christopher D Manning. A structural probe for finding syntax in word
representations. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
and Short Papers) , pages 4129–4138, 2019.
[16] Weizhe Hua, Zihang Dai, Hanxiao Liu, and Quoc Le. Transformer quality in linear time. In
International conference on machine learning , pages 9099–9117. PMLR, 2022.
[17] Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Jia-
jun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Keming Lu, et al. Qwen2. 5-coder technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.12186 , 2024.
[18] Aaron Jaech, Adam Kalai, Adam Lerer, Adam Richardson, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aiden Low, Alec
Helyar, Aleksander Madry, Alex Beutel, Alex Carney, et al. Openai o1 system card. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.16720 , 2024.
[19] Maxwell Jia. Aime 2024 dataset. https://huggingface.co/datasets/Maxwell-Jia/
AIME_2024 , 2024.
[20] Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh
Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile
Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut
Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. Mistral 7b, 2023.
[21] Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon Child,
Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361 , 2020.
[22] Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: a
benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 7:453–466, 2019.
[23] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu,
Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large lan-
guage model serving with pagedattention. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 29th Symposium
on Operating Systems Principles , 2023.
[24] Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
associations in gpt. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:17359–17372, 2022.
[25] Niklas Muennighoff, Zitong Yang, Weijia Shi, Xiang Lisa Li, Li Fei-Fei, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Percy Liang, Emmanuel Candès, and Tatsunori Hashimoto. s1: Simple
test-time scaling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.19393 , 2025.
[26] Ramesh Nallapati, Bowen Zhou, Caglar Gulcehre, Bing Xiang, et al. Abstractive text sum-
marization using sequence-to-sequence rnns and beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.06023 ,
2016.
[27] Shashi Narayan, Shay B Cohen, and Mirella Lapata. Don’t give me the details, just the
summary! topic-aware convolutional neural networks for extreme summarization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1808.08745 , 2018.
[28] Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.02155 , 2022.
[29] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9, 2019.
13[30] Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christopher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and
Chelsea Finn. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:53728–53741, 2023.
[31] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Zero: Memory optimiza-
tions toward training trillion parameter models. In SC20: International Conference for High
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , pages 1–16. IEEE, 2020.
[32] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions
for machine comprehension of text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05250 , 2016.
[33] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. Deepspeed: System
optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In
Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery &
data mining , pages 3505–3506, 2020.
[34] Gautam Reddy. The mechanistic basis of data dependence and abrupt learning in an in-context
classification task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03002 , 2023.
[35] Timo Schick, Ananya Dwivedi-Yu, Roberta Raileanu, Saghar Hosseini, Murray Chadwick, Gau-
rav Mishra, Siddharth Karamcheti, Neil Houlsby, Aravind Elangovan, Mike Lewis, et al. Tool-
former: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761 ,
2023.
[36] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal
policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017.
[37] Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang,
Mingchuan Zhang, YK Li, Y Wu, et al. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03300 , 2024.
[38] Jianlin Su, Murtadha Ahmed, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Wen Bo, and Yunfeng Liu. Roformer:
Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding. Neurocomputing , 568:127063, 2024.
[39] Kimi Team, Angang Du, Bofei Gao, Bowei Xing, Changjiu Jiang, Cheng Chen, Cheng Li,
Chenjun Xiao, Chenzhuang Du, Chonghua Liao, et al. Kimi k1. 5: Scaling reinforcement
learning with llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12599 , 2025.
[40] Qwen Team. QwQ-32B: Embracing the Power of Reinforcement Learning, March 2025.
[41] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timo-
thée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open
and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023.
[42] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei,
Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open
foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 , 2023.
[43] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information
processing systems , 30, 2017.
[44] Jesse Vig and Yonatan Belinkov. Analyzing the structure of attention in a transformer language
model. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.04284 , 2019.
[45] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V Le, Ed H Chi, and Denny Zhou.
Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.11171 , 2022.
[46] Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A Smith, Daniel Khashabi,
and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-instruct: Aligning language models with self-generated instruc-
tions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10560 , 2022.
14[47] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani
Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, et al. Emergent abilities of large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.07682 , 2022.
[48] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi,
Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903 , 2022.
[49] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony
Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer,
Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain
Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-
art natural language processing. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online, October 2020.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[50] Yonghui Wu, Mike Schuster, Zhifeng Chen, Quoc V Le, Mohammad Norouzi, Wolfgang
Macherey, Maxim Krikun, Yuan Cao, Qin Gao, Klaus Macherey, et al. Google’s neural machine
translation system: Bridging the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.08144 , 2016.
[51] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu,
Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang,
Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin
Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin
Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin,
Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang
Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng
Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen3 technical report, 2025.
[52] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et al. Qwen2. 5 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.15115 , 2024.
[53] An Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bofei Gao, Bowen Yu, Chengpeng Li, Dayiheng
Liu, Jianhong Tu, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, et al. Qwen2. 5-math technical report: Toward
mathematical expert model via self-improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.12122 , 2024.
[54] Weihao Zeng, Yuzhen Huang, Qian Liu, Wei Liu, Keqing He, Zejun Ma, and Junxian He.
Simplerl-zoo: Investigating and taming zero reinforcement learning for open base models in the
wild, 2025.
[55] Denny Zhou, Dale Schuurmans, Xuezhi Wang, Ed Chi, and Quoc V Le. Least-to-most prompting
enables complex reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.10625 , 2023.
15